---
slug: ethics
priority: 100
title: Whose ethics are they anyway?
description:
  A feature piece summarising the results of a reader survey by
  ArtsProfesssional.
date: 2022-11-22T22:35:58.583Z
tags:
  - news
  - feature
---

_T﻿his piece was published in
[ArtsProfessional](https://www.artsprofessional.co.uk/magazine/article/whose-ethics-are-they-anyway)_

If one thing is clear
from [the results of AP’s latest Pulse survey on the ethics of sponsorship](https://www.artsprofessional.co.uk/pulse/survey-report/pulse-report-ethics-arts-sponsorship-risks-accepting-money),
then it is that ‘Take the money and run’ is not a viable policy for arts
organisations. Arts workers are almost unanimous in their call for organisations
to consider the actions and motives of potential supporters before accepting
their money. Even those who argue it is possible to turn ‘bad money into good’
Robin Hood-style, think it unwise to welcome any and all offers with open arms.

The survey asked about sponsorship and major donations in relation to four broad
ethical areas: activities relating to politics, such as oppressive regimes or
armaments, and those that negatively impact the environment, human wellbeing,
such as tobacco or alcohol, and animals. It's clear that arts workers believe
activities in all of these areas – and others beside – could potentially make a
sponsor or major donor inappropriate, but there is no consensus on where the red
line should be drawn.

### Whose values?

The revealing responses disclose arts workers’ personal values. “Animal
‘testing’ may include genuinely beneficial research using animals under Home
Office licence,” says one respondent. Another points out that while it may be
appropriate to accept sponsorship from a Champagne or gin brand for some of an
orchestra’s work, it probably shouldn’t support its children’s programmes. Some
activities are judged more ‘unethical’ than others – but there’s little
agreement on the hierarchy.

According to one respondent, “the main issue is what is the sponsor expecting in
return.” Another asks: “Where do you stop? Do you start by asking the patrons
where they work and who pays their wages?”

More fundamentally, the survey findings raise the question of ‘whose ethics’
arts organisations should adopt. “It is important to look across the whole of
society and not the organisation’s own immediate echo chamber to make this
judgement,” writes one. Another points out that while public consensus agrees
cigarettes shouldn’t be advertised, “it is not yet the case that the general
public think that mining and selling fossil fuels is unethical”.

“Why do we expect the arts to be moral and not the general public,” asks one,
and several question whether arts workers, with their left-leaning tendencies,
are capable of making decisions that reflect wider society’s views – or those of
the public they hope to engage. Another argues that decisions should take
account of context and the local community “outside the middle class, liberal
bubble”. Speaking of the
recent [protest that led BAE Systems to pull out as a sponsor of the Great Exhibition of the North](https://www.artsprofessional.co.uk/news/arms-dealer-ends-arts-festival-sponsorship-following-backlash),
they go on to suggest “maybe BAE’s employees could have been incredible audience
development opportunity”.

But many others are passionately in favour of arts organisations challenging
‘immoral behaviour’. “Artists are a moral voice for society,” writes one.
Another says: “Art has to uphold and underpin the rights of humanity when
governments and corporations don’t. It is imperative we take the moral high
ground and stand against anyone who tries to crush or oppress an individual’s
rights or the growth of society creatively.”

### Policy and practice

And here lies the crux of the issue – how should organisations make these
decisions, and who should make them? Formal policies to help guide ethical
decisions in relation to sponsorship deals or major gifts are still quite rare
in the arts – only a quarter of survey respondents are aware of their
organisation having one in place.

While those that do have a policy are overwhelmingly positive about it, they are
no less likely to consider their organisation to be ‘at risk’ of accepting
support from the wrong kind of person or organisation and suffering reputational
damage as a result. High-profile protests and media storms are given as evidence
of how damaging a poor decision can be. “The recent furore around BAE Systems
sponsorship of the Great Exhibition of the North just goes to show what happens
when organisations don’t take into account the ethics of their donors,” writes
one.

A lack of time and resources, and the pressure to raise money privately,
contributes to this risk. Over half fear financial pressure might push them to
accepting inappropriate support. One respondent sums up the views of many: “Arts
organisations are under pressure to increase earned income and sponsorship at
all costs and it puts them in a very vulnerable position.”

Not having a policy in place can only heighten this vulnerability.

### Fundamental divide

Even if policies are written and followed though, the fundamental problem
remains about what should be driving decision-making across the sector. One
respondent illustrates this dilemma perfectly: “If we refuse support not because
we think the donor unethical, but because we are worried about ‘reputational
damage’, then that in itself is an unethical decision.”

A divide is evident even among those with a policy in place. Some see their
policy as principally about maintaining their organisation’s values and moral
standing, while others believe it is purely about protecting their
organisation’s reputation. Some think it is absolutely right for decisions to be
made on a simple ‘risk-versus-reward’ basis, taking into consideration how
association with a sponsor or donor may negatively impact audience numbers, or
reduce their organisation’s standing with partners, artists and other
supporters.

Others feel passionately that the arts is a unique sector, with a mission to
improve lives and the world as a whole. And they believe this mission should
preclude any action that might support those who have a hand in causing harm.

This divide lies at the heart of the debate about ethics in arts sponsorship and
fundraising. If the sector is to move towards a consensus, then we need much
more open discussion and transparency around decision-making.

Some would like to see larger organisations and sector bodies take a lead on
this, and what is undoubtedly concerning is the silence that radiates from any
and all arts organisation that have been embroiled in controversy. “Rarely does
a cultural organisation comment on the ethics of those they partner with,”
points out one respondent. “An important first step is to have a more open and
informed debate – panel discussions and published policies/processes can all aid
in doing this.”

Hopefully, [ArtsProfessional's survey](https://www.artsprofessional.co.uk/pulse/survey-report/pulse-report-ethics-arts-sponsorship) will
be a useful catalyst.

**Frances Richens is Editor of ArtsProfessional.**
